---
title: "How Pyenv Works"
date: 2023-01-08
---


When you run a command like python or pip, 
your operating system searches through a list of directories to find an executable file with that name. 
This list of directories lives in an environment variable called PATH, 
with each directory in the list separated by a colon:
```shell
 env | grep PATH
 
PATH=/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:
```
Directories in PATH are searched from left to right, so a matching executable in a directory at the beginning of the list takes precedence over another one at the end. In this example, the /usr/local/bin directory will be searched first, then /usr/bin, then /bin.

pyenv works by inserting a directory of shims at the front of your PATH:
```shell
PATH=(pyenv root)shims:/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:
```

In the `shims` dir, there are "Shims", which are lightweight executables that simply pass your command along to pyenv. 

pyenv maintains shims in that directory to match every Python command across every installed version of Python — python, pip, and so on.

So with pyenv installed, when you run, say, pip, your operating system will do the following:

1. Search your PATH for an executable file named pip
2. Find the pyenv shim named pip at the beginning of your PATH
3. OS runs the shim named pip, which in turn passes the command along to pyenv


When you execute a shim, pyenv determines which Python version to use by reading it from the following sources, in this order:

The PYENV_VERSION environment variable (if specified). You can use the pyenv shell command to set this environment variable in your current shell session.

The application-specific .python-version file in the current directory (if present). You can modify the current directory's .python-version file with the pyenv local command.

The first .python-version file found (if any) by searching each parent directory, until reaching the root of your filesystem.

Reference: [github](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv)

